### Representation Theory
Let $G$ be a group and $V$ be a vector space. A representation of $G$ on $V$ is a homomorphism $\rho: G \rightarrow GL(V)$.
Let $G$ be a group and $V$ be a vector space. A linear operator $T : V \rightarrow V'$ is said to be $G$-invariant if $T(\rho(g)v) = \rho'(g)Tv$ for all $g \in G$ and $v \in V$.

**Schur's lemma**: if $\rho$ and $\rho'$ are irreducible, then $T$ is either an isomorphism or zero. Moreover, if $\rho=\rho'$ then $T=\lambda I$.
   >Say $T$ is not zero. $\ker T$ is a subspace of $V$ and $\rho(g)\ker T = \ker T$ for all $g \in G$. Thus, $\ker T$ is a $G$-invariant subspace of $V$. Since $\rho$ is irreducible, $\ker T = 0$ or $V$. 
   $im T$ is a subsace of $V'$ and $\rho'(g)im T = im T$ for all $g \in G$. Thus, $im T$ is a $G$-invariant subspace of $V'$. Since $\rho'$ is irreducible, $im T = V'$.
   If $\rho=\rho'$, then if $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of $T$, $T-\lambda I$ is not an isomorphism, so it is $0$.

$\tilde{T} \equiv \frac{1}{|G|}\sum_{g \in G} \rho'(g^{-1})T\rho(g)$ is $G$-invariant. $\tilde{T}$ could be zero.

Irreducible representations are $\rho : SU_n \rightarrow GL(V)$. $SU_n$ linear maps between two 
reps $SU_n$. Schur's Lemma applies to all groups.       

The number of irreducible characters is equal to number of conjugacy classes. Sum of squares of dimensions of irreducible characters is equal to $|G|$.
If $\chi$ and $\chi'$ are irreducible characters of $G$, then 
$$\begin{cases}\langle \chi, \chi'\rangle = 0 & \text{if } \chi \not\simeq \chi' \\ \langle \chi, \chi'\rangle = 1 & \text{if } \chi \simeq \chi'\end{cases}$$
>Let $\chi'$ have dimension $m$ and $\chi$ have dimension $n$. Consider the linear operator on $\mathbb{C}^{m\times n}$
	$T(M) = \frac{1}{|G|}\sum\limits_{g\in G} R_{g^{-1}}' M R_g$
	By previous lemma, $T(M)$ is $G$ invariant, and $T(M)=M$ if $M$ is G-invariant. $T$ is a projection onto 
	the space of $G$-invariant matrices, so its trace is the dimension of $G$ invariant matrices. But this is equal
	to $1$ if $\chi \simeq \chi'$ and $0$ otherwise by Schur's Lemma. We also get
	$\frac{1}{|G|}\sum\limits_{g\in G} Tr R_{g^{-1}}' Tr R_{g} = \frac{1}{|G|}\sum\limits_{g\in G}\overline{\chi'(g)}\chi(g) = \langle \chi', \chi\rangle$


Any continuous representation $\rho : SU_n \rightarrow GL(V)$ is isomorphic to a direct sum of irreducibles.

Define $\chi_V : SU_n \rightarrow \mathbb{C}$ as $\chi_V(g) = Tr \rho(g)$. \newline Define $\langle \chi, \chi'\rangle = \frac{1}{\text{Vol } SU_n}\int_{SU_n}\overline{\chi(g)}\chi'(g)dg$.

If $SU_n \curvearrowright V, V'$ are continuous irreducible, then 
$$\langle \chi_V, \chi_{V'}\rangle = \begin{cases}
            1 & \text{if } V = V' \\
            0 & \text{otherwise}
        \end{cases}$$
For every continuous irreducible representation $SU_n \curvearrowright GL(V)$, $V \simeq \bigoplus_{i} V_i^{\oplus n_i}$
Consider $SU_2$ acting on $\mathbb{C}^2$ by matrix multiplication. $V = { u^n \alpha_n + \dots v^n \alpha_0}$ is $n+1$ dimensional vector space.
Action is given by 
$$\begin{pmatrix}
        u & \overline{v} \\
        -v & \overline{u}
    \end{pmatrix} w = \sum (au + bv)^i (-\overline{b}u + \overline{a}v)^{n-i} \alpha_i$$
$SU_2 \simeq \mathbb{S}^3$. Conjugacy class corresponding to $$\begin{pmatrix}
        e^{i\theta} & 0 \\
        0 & e^{-i\theta}
    \end{pmatrix}$$ is circles in $\mathbb{S}^3$. Equator corresponds to $\theta =\frac{\pi}{2}$.

$\langle \chi_{V_{n+1}}, \chi_{V_{m+1}}\rangle = \frac{1}{2\pi^2}\int\limits_{0}^{\pi} \sum_{k=0}^n e^{-i\theta(2x-n)}\sum_{k=0}^m e^{i\theta (2k-m)} \text{Vol slice of }$
### Specht Modules
A standard young tableau fills a partition diagram with numbers such that it's monotonic in horizontal and vertical directions.
Polytabloid $e_T$ is 
$e_T = \sum\limits_{\pi \in C(T)} \text{sgn}(\pi)\pi \star \{T\}$
Specht module is spanned by polytabloids $e_T$ where $T$ is taken over all tableaux of shape $\lambda$.

### Ring Theory
Monoid is set with binary operation and unit, but no inverses.
We consider commutative rings, which have an abelian addition group operation and multiplication monoid operation.
We can define $R\left[\alpha\right]$ as generated by $\alpha\in R' \ni R$. $\alpha$ is algebraic if
a polynomial with coefficients in $R$ can be made to $0$, otherwise it is transcendental.
We can write $f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x)$ where leading coefficient of $g$ is a unit. 
	
given rings $R,R'$, a homomorphism $\phi : R \rightarrow R'$ is a map such that $\phi(r_1 + r_2) = \phi(r_1) + \phi(r_2)$, $\phi(r_1r_2) = \phi(r_1)\phi(r_2)$, $\phi(0)=0$, $\phi(1)=1$.
If $f$ is bijective, it's an isomorphism and $f^{-1}$ is also a homomorphism.
The map $R\left[x\right] \rightarrow^{f} R\left[\alpha\right]$ is a homomorphism. For example, $R\left[X\right]\left[Y\right] \rightarrow R\left[X,Y\right]$

A subset $I \subset R$ is an ideal if it's closed under addition, contains $0$, and for each $x,r \in I,R$, $xr,rx\in I$. Definition applies to non-commutative rings. 
The kernel of any ring homomorphism is an ideal. Proper ideal is not $(0)$ or $(1)$. 
Principle ideals are generated by $1$ element. Examples: $\mathbb{Z}$ or $\mathbb{F}\left[x\right]$. Meanwhile, $(X,Y)\in R\left[X,Y\right]$ is not a principle ideal.
Given $I,I'\subset R$, $I\cap I'$ and $I+I'$ are ideals.
If $R$ is commutative, $R / I = \{ a+I| a\in R\}$ satisfies $(a+I)(b+I) = ab+I$. 
$R\rightarrow^f R/I$ is homomorphism. $\ker f=I$.

Exist ring homomorphism $R\rightarrow R/I$ with kernel exactly $I$. If we have $f:R\rightarrow R'$ and the kernel of $f$ contains $I$, then there exists $g$ such that $g\phi=f$. If $R\rightarrow R'$ is surjective, then $R/I \equiv R'$. 
There exists a one to one between ideals of $R/I$ and ideals of $R$ which contain $I$.

Let $R$ be a field, and $V$ is an $R$-vector space is $R$ acts on $V$ with typical properties. If $R$ is a module, $V$ is a $R$-module. If $R$ is a non-commutative ring, the notion of a left $R$-module and right $R$-module are different.
Linear combinations of group elements, $\mathbb{C}\left[G\right]$ is a ring and if $V$ is a $G$-rep, then $V$ is a $\mathbb{C}\left[G\right]$-module.
If $R\curvearrowright V,V'$, then $f:V\rightarrow V'$ is a $R$-module homomorphism if $frv = rfv$.
The kernel of $f$ is a submodule of $V$, an abelian subgroup preserved by $f$.

for example, $V=R$ is a $R$-module. $V=R^{\otimes n}$ is also a $R$-module. An ideal $I$ is a sub-module of $R$.

Let $R$ be a commutative ring. An ideal $I \subset R$ is maximual iff $R/I$ is a field and prime iff $R/I$ is an integral domain.
>$f$ irreducible implies $(f)$ is maximal. $(f)$ prime implies $f$ is irreducible.
  If $f=gh$, $g \in (f)$ or $h \in (f)$, so $f|g$ or $f|h$, so $(f)$ is not prime. $(f) \subset (g) \subset F\left[x\right]$. $g$ is not a unit, $g|f$, but $f\not|g$, so $(f)$ is not maximal.
    
For $R=\mathbb{Z}$, ideals are $(d)$, prime and maximal ideals are $(p)$ for $p$ prime.
If $R=F\left[x\right]$, ideals are $(f)$ for some $f(x)$. 
If $R$ is Noetherian, than any ideal is finitely generated.
$S$ multiplicative subset of $R\\ 0$, $R\rightarrow R_S$. $I\subset R$ is prime ideal iff $R\\ I$ is a multiplicative subset.
> $a,b \in R \backslash I\implies ab \in R \backslash I$. Also, $ab \in I$ iff $a\in I$ or $b\in I$.
> $R_I \equiv R_{R\\ I} = \left\{\frac{r}{s}, r\in R, s\not\in I\right\}$.

A commutative ring $R$ is local if it has a single maximal ideal.
A field is local, $\mathbb{Z}$ is not local.
If $I$ is prime, $R_I$ is a local ring with maximal ideal $m=\left\{\frac{r}{s}, r\in I, s\not\in I\right\}$.

Stronger: any element of $R\backslash m$ is a unit. (If there exists an ideal $J\subset m$, then take $f\in J\backslash m$, but $f$ would have to be a unit implying $J=(1)$)
$\frac{r}{s}\in R_I \backslash m$ implies $r\not\in I$ so $\frac{s}{r}\in R_I$ of course $\frac{r}{s}\frac{s}{r}=1$.

For every multiplicative subsets $S\subset R\backslash 0$, exist bijection between prime prime prime prime prime ideals in $R_S$ and prime ideals in $R$ which do not intersect $S$. The map is $I\rightarrow \frac{I}{S}$ and $J\rightarrow p(J)$. When $S=\frac{R}{I}$, one to one.

Algebraic geometry studies the ring $\mathbb{C}\left[x_1,\dots ,x_n\right]$ e.g. in two variables $(X,Y)$ is maximal, $(X)$ is prime but not maximal. $(XY)$ is not prime.
Let $f_1,\dots ,f_n$ be polynomials in $n$ variables. Then the ideal $(f_1,\dots ,f_n)$ is prime iff $f_1,\dots ,f_n$ have a common zero.
> Any maximal ideal is of the form $(x_1-a_1, \dots ,x_n-a_n)$ for some $a_i \in \mathbb{C}$. Assume $(f_1,\dots f_n)\subset m$ for some maximal ideal $m$. Then
    $\mathbb{C}\left[x_1,\dots,x_n\right] \rightarrow \mathbb{C}\left[x_1,\dots,x_n\right]/m = F$
	Restrict $\phi$ to $\mathbb{C}\left[x_i\right]$ for every given $i$. $\ker \phi_i=J_i \subset \mathbb{C}\left[x_i\right] = (g_i)$ for some polynomial $g_i(x)$.
	$g_i=0$ means $\phi_i$ is injective so $F \supset \mathbb{C}(x_i)$.
	$g_i$ is an irreducible polynomial b/c $J_i$ is prime which implies $g_i=X_i-a_i$ for some $a_i\in \mathbb{C}$

An affine algebraic variety is $V=\{f_1(x)=\dots = f_k(x)=0\}\subset \mathbb{C}^n$ where $x=(x_1,\dots,x_n)\in \mathbb{C}^n$ and $f_1,\dots f_k$ are polys.
Given an affine algebraic variety $V$, consider $J(V)$ which is the set of polynomials that vanish on $V$.
$J(V)$ is an ideal. For any ideal $I\subset \mathbb{C}\left[x_1,\dots x_n\right]$, $J(V(I)) = \sqrt(I)$,  $\sqrt{I}=\left\{f\in R | f^n \in I \text{ for some n}\right\}$

There's a bijection between affine algebraic varieties in $\mathbb{C}^n$ and radical ideals in $\mathbb{C}\left[x_1,\dots x_n\right]$. 
For example $\sqrt{(x^2)}=(x)$.
If $\sqrt{I}=(1)$, then $I=(1)$. 
$I$ is radical if $\sqrt{I}=I$.

Connection between $R=\mathbb{C}\left[x_1,\dots x_n\right]$ and $\mathbb{C}^n$. Maximal ideals correspond to points, prime ideals to irreducible varieties, radical ideals to affine algebraic variaties.

### Factoring
Integral domain is cancellable ring with no zero divisors.
Associates means that both $a|b$ and $b|a$. 
Prime means if $p|ab$, $p|a$ or $p|b$.
Irreducible means if $r=ab$, $a$ or $b$ is a unit.
In a UFD, factorizing terminates and is unique. Any prime is automatically irreducible in a domain, but every irreducible is prime in a UFD.
Note factorizing terminates when $R$ is Noetherian. But Notherian is stronger because it's a chain of any ideals.
For a UFD, the gcd of $a$ and $b$ always exists, i.e. the element $e$ such that for all $d|a$, $d|b$, $d|e$. $d$ is the product of irreducible factors in 

Gauss Lemma says that if $R$ is a UFD, then $R\left[x\right]$ is a UFD.
A domain is a principal ideal domain if all ideals are principal. $\mathbb{Z}\left[x\right]$ is not a PID since the ideal generated by $(2,x)$ does not contain $1$. In a PID, the gcd of $a$ and $b$ is a linear combination of $a$ and $b$.
GCD's and ideals are synonymous.

Any PID is a UFD
>    Any prime ideal is maximal.
    And, any irreducible generates a maximal ideal which is prime. Consider $(g)$, it is maximal since all ideals are principal, and we can't have a principal ideal sandwhiched between $(g)$ and $(1)$.. Now if $g = ab$, then $a$ or $b$ is a unit. So $g$ is irreducible.

The canonical domain is $\mathbb{Z}\left[-5\right]$, UFD is $\mathbb{Z}\left[x\right]$, and PID is  
    A domain $R$ is an ED if the euclidean algorithm holds. There exists size function $N:R\rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$ such that for any $a,b\in R$, $b\neq 0$, there exists $q,r\in R$ such that $a=bq+r$ and $N(r)<N(b)$. GCD can be computed.
The domains can be characterized by what they say about GCDs. In UFD, gcd can be computed by looking at factors. in PID, GCD is equal to linear combination of the two operators. In ED, GCD can be calculated by repeated division with remainder.
$R=\mathbb{Z}\left[i\right]$ with $N(a+bi)=a^2+b^2$ is a ED. The proof is constructing a square lattice.

$f\in \mathbb{Z}\left[x\right]$ is irreducible iff it is irreducible in $\mathbb{Q}\left[x\right]$ and $f$ is primitive.
If f is int poly, $p$ is prime not dividing leading coefficient, then if $f$'s reduction is irreducible, then $f$ is irreducible in rationals. 

### Quadratic number fields
Let $R$ be a ring. An ideal $P$ is prime iff $R/P$ is an integral domain, or if $P\neq R$ and if $a,b\in R$ and $ab\in P$, then $a\in P$ or $b\in P$, or if $A$ and $B$ are ideals of $R$ and $AB\subset P$, then $A\subset P$ or $B\subset P$.
Let $R$ be a ring of integers in an imaginary quadratic field. The product of a non-zero ideal $A$ of $R$ and its conjugate is a principal ideal generated by a positive ordinary integer.
The zero ideal is prime iff $R$ is an integral domain. Any maximal ideal is prime. A principal ideal $(\alpha)$ is a prime ideal iff $\alpha$ is a prime element of $R$.
Let $R$ be a ring of integers in an imaginary quadratic number field. Let $A$ and $B$ be ideals of $R$, and let $P$ be a prime ideal of $R$ that is not the zero ideal.
If $P$ divides the product ideal $AB$, then $P$ divides $A$ or $B$.
Let $R$ be the ring of integers in the imaginary quadratic number field $F$. The factorization of $R$ into prime ideals is unique.
The ring of integers $R$ is a UFD iff it is a PID
>If $B$ is maximal, then it's prime. Otherwise, $B=AC$. 

### Galois Theory
Let $K$ be a splitting field of $f$ over a field $F$. Then if $g$ is irreducible in $F\left[x\right]$ and has a root in $K$, then $g$ splits over $K$.
Separable polynomial has distinct roots in splitting field.
Separable means nice.
Any separable algebraic field extension $K/F$ has a primitive generator so $K=F\left[\alpha\right]$.
Any separable algebraic field extension with degree of any element of $K$ in $F$ is bounded is finite degree.
Galois group of $K/F$ is group of automorphisms from $K$ to $K$ fixing $F$.
Note that Galois group of $F\left[\alpha\right]/F$ is fixed by where $\alpha$ goes.
Galois extension has that the order of Galois group is equal to degree of extension. Also $F=K^{\text{Gal}(K/F)}$. Or $K$ is splitting field of some $f\in F\left[x\right]$.
Constructing Galois extensions. Take a finite subgroup $H$ of the group of automorphisms of $K$. $F=K^H$ is elements of $K$ such that
all elements of $H$ preserve that element. Then Galois group of $K/K^H$ is $H$.
>construct minimal poly $f$ of $a$ over $K$. Take $H$ orbit of $a$, let it be equal to $a_1,\dots a_r$.
    Take $(x-a_1)\dots (x-a_r)$; it is in $K^H\left[x\right]$. Then, $K$ is algebraic over $K^H$, 
    degree of $a$ is at most $r$ and $r$ divides degree of $|H|$ by orbit-stabilizer theorem. $H$ is inside of the Galois group of $K/K^H$ since it fixes $K^H$. The degree of $K$ with respect to $K^H$ is at most $|H|$ because 
    by primitive element theorem we take $\alpha \in K$ such that $K=K^H\left[\alpha\right]$. Then, $K^H\left[\alpha\right]$ is a vector space over $K^H$ with dimension at most $|H|$.
	But the order of the Galois group $K/K^H$ is at most the degree of $K$ over $K^H$ which is at most $|H|$. Thus, the Galois group is $H$.

An extension $K\supset F$ is Galois iff $F=K^H$ for some subgroup for automorphisms of $K$ $H$. The forwards direction is 
to take $H$ to be the Galois group of $K/F$. Then $\left[K:F\right] = \left[K:K^H\right]\left[K^H:F\right]$. $\left[K:K^H\right]=|H|$ by previous theorem, and 
 so $F=K^H$. If we say $K\supset F$ is finite instead of Galois, we get the order of the Galois group divides $\left[K:F\right]$.
An extension $K\supset F$ is Galois iff $K$ is the splitting field of of some $f\in F\left[x\right]$.
>If $K$ is the splitting field of $f$, then $K=F\left[\alpha_1,\dots \alpha_n\right]$ where $\alpha_i$ are roots of $f$. Then, $K$ is the splitting field of $f$ over $F\left[\alpha_1,\dots \alpha_{i-1}\right]$.
    Then, $K$ is the splitting field of $f$ over $F$ by induction. $K$ is Galois over $F$ since it is the splitting field of $f$ over $F$.
    If $K$ is Galois over $F$, then $K$ is the splitting field of $f$ over $F$ for some $f$ by previous theorem.

Exist an isomorphism between field extensions $L$ with $F\subset L\subset K$ and subgroups $H$ of $\text{Gal}(K/F)$.
This isomorphism is by taking $L$ to $\text{Gal}(K/F)$ and $H$ to $K^H$.
For a cubic with $\sqrt{\Delta}$ nonrational, the Galois group is $S_3$.
$S_3$ has subgroups trivial, $A_3$, and three transposition subgroups.

### Algebraic Geometry
>**universal property**: given sets $M$ and $N$ a product is $P$ with maps $\mu: P\rightarrow M$ and $\nu: P\rightarrow N$ , for any set $P'$ with maps $\mu': P'\rightarrow M$ and $\nu': P' \rightarrow N$ , there is a unique map $f: P' \rightarrow P$ with $\mu' = \mu \circ f$ and $\nu'=\nu\circ f$ 
>**category**: set of objects, and for each pair of objects $A$ and $B$ , a set of morphisms $M(A, B)$ that are **associative**. for each object there is an **identity morphism**: $id_A: A\rightarrow A$ 
>examples are sets, vector spaces, groups
>**groupoid**: generalizes group to have more than 1 identity element. every morphism has an inverse. $\Pi_1(X)$ is fundamental groupoid of topological space where objects are points in $X$ and morphisms are homotopy classes of paths from $x$ to $y$ 
>**$A$-modules** (vector space generalization) form category; objects are all $A$-modules and morphisms are homomorphisms
>**Topological Spaces** : objects are topological spaces and morphisms are continuous functions
>**Open sets**: there is a morphism $U\rightarrow V$ iff $U\subset V$ 
>**Posets**: single morphism btwn $x$ and $y$ iff $x\ge y$ 
>**covariant functor** $F$ maps category $A$ to $B$, where for each morphism $m: A_1 \rightarrow A_2$ , $F(m): F(A_1)\rightarrow F(A_2)$ and $F(id_A)=id_{F(A)}$ and $F(m_2\circ m_1)=F(m_2)\circ F(m_1)$ . **forgetful functor** like $A$-module to abelian group
>**zariski topology** $\mathbb{A}^n$  over field $k$, closed sets are **algebraic varieties**, $V(f_1,\dots f_m) = \{(a_1,\dots a_n)\in\mathbb{A}^n|f_i(a_1,\dots a_n)=0\}$ - fewer open sets 

> **cohomology groups** $H^

>**colimit** 

>**double complex** collection of $A$-modules $E^{p,q}$ (p,q ints) and morphisms $d_{\rightarrow}^{p,q}:E^{p,q}\rightarrow E^{p+1,q}$ and $d_{\uparrow}^{p,q}:E^{p,q}\rightarrow E^{p,q+1}$  up and right's square to 0 and up and right commute/anti-commute
>$E^k$ is diagonal sum, and $d=d_{\rightarrow}+d_{\uparrow}$  
>**spectral sequence** is $\rightarrow E_i^{p,q}$  along with $d_r^{p,q}:  E_r^{p,q} \rightarrow E_r^{p-r+1,q+r}$ with $d_r^{p,q}\circ d_r^{p+r-1,q-r}=0$ ; isomorphism of **cohomology** 

>the **ring** of differentiable functions on $X=\mathbb{R}^n$  on some open set $U$ is $\mathcal{O}(U$)
>**germs** are objects of the form $\{(f, \text{open } U) : p\in U, f\in \mathcal{O}(U) \}$ , where if for some open set $W\subset U,V$ with $f|_W=g|_W$ then $(f,U)\sim (g, V)$ . the set of germs is **stalk** $\mathcal{O}_p$ 
>$O_p$ is **local ring** (commutative, unique maximal ideal) because maximal ideal $m_p$ is all germs vanishing at $p$ . $m_p/m_p^2$ is a module over $\frac{\mathcal{O}_p}{m_p}= \mathbb{R}$
> **presheaf** $\mathscr{F}$ on topological space $X$ has $\mathscr{F}(U)=\Gamma(U,\mathscr{F})=H^0(U,\mathscr{F})$ , a set containing sections of $\mathscr{F}$ over $U$ , and for each inclusion $U \hookrightarrow V$, **restriction map**  $\text{res}_{V,U}:\mathscr{F}(V)\rightarrow \mathscr{F}(U)$ with $\text{res}_{U,U}=id_{\mathscr{F}(U)}$ and if $U\hookrightarrow V \hookrightarrow W$ then the restriction maps commute
> 


algebraic subset $V(S)=\{a_1,\dots a_n \in k^n | f(a_1,\dots a_n) = 0 \forall f \in S\}$ 
